BRAZIL 2021
Published on February 12, 2022
Solidarity Center (SC)

Rights Based Approaches to Promote Freedom of Association and Inclusive Unionism

$975,000

To assist unions to defend fundamental labor rights and seek improved working conditions, the Center will work with partners in a variety of economic sectors in Brazil and Paraguay to build their organizational capacity and security, enhance their communications, and improve their ability to represent vulnerable groups.

 

SITAWI

Pact for Democracy

$100000

To promote democratic culture and the value of dialogue and citizen engagement to defend democratic processes and principles in Brazil. The organization will support the Pacto Pela Democracia (Pact for Democracy) initiative, a civil society platform that includes a plural and diverse group of civil society and political actors. The coalition will identify and promote democratic innovations, organize public dialogues on key topics of democracy with plural panels, and monitor and mobilize collective actions in response to threats to democracy.

 

Politize! – Instituto de Educação Política

Dialogue Networks in Brazil

$189417

To stimulate a culture of dialogue and respect for diverse opinions. The organization will promote constructive discourse around sensitive topics by developing content and materials for youth engagement, including detailed curricula and training for teachers, regarding tolerance and respectful debates that will be used in schools. The organization will engage social media influencers, civil society networks, and its own volunteers to ensure that multiple audiences participate in these activities around the country.

 

Associação Artigo 19 Brasil

Protecting Technology and Civic Space in the 2022 Electoral Process

$111430

To promote the effective use of technology and digital voting. The organization will educate citizens, journalists, and key stakeholders on the use of digital technologies in the 2022 electoral process to promote confidence in the elections. They will monitor and raise awareness of threats to the integrity of citizen participation and digital voting and conduct advocacy to promote legislative proposals to protect these mechanisms.

 

Fundação Fernando Henrique Cardoso

Fura Bolha: Fostering Democratic Dialogue in Brazil

$84300

To strengthen democratic culture and values and combat growing political polarization. The Foundation will produce a series of videos with debates on timely public policy issues between prominent political figures from across the political spectrum. The series will address hopes and fears of citizens in an effort to dampen anxieties about voting, the COVID-19 pandemic, and public discourse demonizing political and ideological opponents.

 

SITAWI

Rede Liberdade: Defending Human Rights and Democracy Activists

$161600

To strengthen the rule of law and enhance the legal protection of human rights activists and civil society organizations (CSOs). The organization will conduct strategic litigation and legal training for CSOs to meet a growing demand for legal assistance to confront shrinking spaces for democracy and civic space, cases of harassment against human rights activists, and institutional racism.

 

SITAWI

Delibera: Promoting New Forms of Citizen Engagement with Government

$130000

To demonstrate the merit of citizen deliberation as an effective approach to public decision-making processes. The organization will support the implementation of deliberative processes, known as mini publics, to design and implement municipal legislation that deeply affects the daily lives of citizens, with a focus on the climate change agenda. The project will assist municipal authorities to understand the value and develop the know-how to incorporate citizen input in legislative procedures.

 

Instituto Sou da Paz

Fostering Democratic Debate about Public Security Policy

$155980

To promote informed public scrutiny of security policies in Brazil, and to foster public awareness of the importance of democratic public security policies. The organization will train a diverse array of journalists from national and local, grassroots media outlets on methodologies to gather public security information to produce reports and hold authorities accountable. The grantee will also train influential social media communicators and influencers on these methodologies and publish a manual on access to public security information requests.

 

Associacao Internetlab de Pesquisa em Direito e Tecnologia

Fostering a Democratic Digital Space in Brazil

$96527

To promote a democratic agenda among key actors in social media and to strengthen civil society efforts to combat malicious digital interference on public and political discussions. The organization will conduct trainings and capacity building activities together with a partner organization for digital influencers and civil society activists to strengthen democratic discourse online. It will also promote research and civil society engagement in identifying malicious and coordinated uses of computational techniques to distort the digital public sphere.

 

Transparência Brasil

Strengthening the Collective Advocacy Network

$75000

To strengthen the capacity of civil society to advocate effectively in the Brazilian national congress. The network will carry out capacity building activities to provide tools, knowledge, and methodologies to improve the ability of its member organizations to use evidence-based analysis, social listening, and effective communication strategies to enhance their advocacy on issues of public interest and democracy.